I'd like to do one more video about conceptual aspects of Anns and the perceptron before we move on
to the math in the next several videos.
So in this video, you will learn more about the basic architecture of Anns and how to interpret them.
You're going to learn some terms like feature space and separating hyperplanes.
And you're going to learn how to visualize the feature space and the predictions of artificial neural
networks.
This is a geometric perspective of Anns and deep learning in general.
So I actually introduced this concept already in the previous video.
And so this video is an expansion of that concept.
Okay.
So let's start with a basic model.
Looks something like this.
We have two inputs x1 and x2.
And those have their own corresponding weights w1 and W2.
We have this computational node here, which is simply computing the sum.
It's the weighted sum of these two inputs weighted by these parameters w1, w2 and then this weighted
sum, which is a linear operation, gets passed through.
The output of that operation is passed through this non-linear function.
And that goes to the output of the model which here we call y hat this little cap here this carrot symbol
or circumflex this is y hat.
And then of course we have the bias term here.
Now remember from the previous video this is set to one.
So this is often left out.
It's just implicitly included in here.
But it does have its own weight okay.
So this is the model architecture the computational graph of this basic perceptron model.
So here's a scientific question.
Can we predict whether students pass or fail an exam based on knowing two features based on how much
they slept, how many hours they slept last night, and how many hours they studied for the exam.
So we measure data from a bunch of students.
We ask them, how much did you sleep and how much did you study?
And then we use that to try to predict whether they pass or fail their exam.
Okay.
So let's start building up a table of these data.
So the data set looks something like this.
We have the student ID number, how much they studied, how much they slept and the result of their
exam.
So student one studied for five hours, slept for five hours and passed the exam.
Student two studied ten hours, slept seven hours and also passed the exam.
Blah blah blah.
This goes on and on and we get to student N.
You know, maybe this is 20 or 20 5 or 1 million, however many entries we have in this data table studied
seven hours, slept five hours and unfortunately did not do so well in the exam.
Now this result here.
This is what we want to predict.
We want the model to take the number of hours studied and the number of hours slept as inputs, so x1
and x2.
And then we want to define these weight parameters such that when the data gets plugged through this
computation and then this computation, the output.
Here the prediction of the model matches as closely as possible to the real world outcome which we measure.
So y is the real outcome that we know.
We measure this.
We you know we know their their exam performance.
So this is y and this is y hat.
This is the prediction.
Now the goal of learning these weights is to get this predicted outcome to be as close as possible to
the true outcome.
So we want y hat to look like y.
And of course, the mechanism that we we do that for the mechanism of learning is gradient descent,
as you know from the previous video.
Now, I don't want to get too much into those details in this video.
That's for the next couple of videos.
Now I want to focus more on the the concept of representing and thinking about these data as inputs
into the model.
Because this model is two dimensional, there are two variables, two inputs.
We can actually represent everything on a two dimensional Cartesian plane, where the x axis corresponds
to the number of hours studied, and the y axis corresponds to the number of hours slept.
So what we can do here is represent each individual student as a dot, as a, you know, a coordinate
on this graph on this plane.
So for example here we have student one and that is plotted as a dot in the at the coordinate five six
because they studied five hours and slept six hours, so on and so on.
Here is student two.
Here is another student is a student N down here who studied seven hours but only slept five hours.
And this student unfortunately failed the exam.
So we're going to draw, um, red dots for all the students who failed the exam and green dots for all
the students who passed the exam.
So we can continue populating this graph for all of these students here.
So each dot corresponds to a student and this entire geometric representation here, this picture here
this is called the feature space.
So the feature space is a geometric representation of the data.
The input data here on the left of this model representation.
So a geometric representation of the data where each feature is an axis and each observation is a coordinate.
So the features correspond to the inputs to the model or the things that we have measured from the real
world.
In this case, we have two features the number of hours studied and the number of hours slept.
So this is the feature space.
And each observation which is each student is a coordinate in that feature space.
Now of course with a two dimensional input space we can just visualize it like this.
In practice we're going to have very high dimensional feature spaces.
They're going to start off as being, you know, hundreds or thousands of dimensions.
And very often in the course of deep learning, we end up changing the dimensionality of the feature
space as we go through the model.
So some layers in the model will have more complicated feature representations.
So higher dimensional feature spaces.
There's going to be other kinds of models we'll use like autoencoders that actually reduce the dimensionality
of the feature space.
Okay, but this is the idea of the feature space.
So now what do we want to do?
Well, you know, we want to draw a line that best separates these data, that best separates the students
who passed from the students who failed.
And if we can find that line, that's actually just going to be a way of setting these these three weight
values here.
If we can find that line, then that means that our model can accurately predict whether a student will
pass or fail purely based on these two variables studied and sleeping time.
Well, obviously, you know what that line looks like.
It's going to look something like this.
Now you can see that this line does a pretty good job.
It's not perfect.
Of course.
We have one data point over here, one data point over here.
But overall this is doing a pretty good job.
Now this line here this is called a separating hyperplane.
Now you might be wondering come on Mike you know why do I have to call this thing a hyperplane?
Sounds like something from, you know, like an old sci fi movie or something.
But in two dimensions.
This is called a line.
In three dimensions it's called a plane.
And in any higher number of dimensions, we call it a hyperplane.
So the general term for this is a separating hyperplane.
When we're working in just two dimensions the hyperplane is really just a line.
Okay.
But what is the idea of a separating hyperplane.
It is a boundary that binarize the feature space.
So it is separating the feature space into two categories.
In this case that would be above the line and below the line.
So this is used as a decision boundary.
Now what does this term mean.
Decision boundary.
Well it means that any data points that fall above the line.
So above and to the right of the line the model will predict that that student is going to pass the
exam.
So the model is using this separating hyperplane in order to make a decision to make a prediction about
the performance of an individual student.
And obviously if you know you have a set of parameters, a set of inputs here.
So this region of the feature space that is below the line, the model will predict that the student
will fail the exam.
Now here the model is making a binary prediction.
So pass or fail.
But of course you know mostly most of the time when you take an exam, it's not just pass or fail.
You also get a grade that's like a continuous score.
So now I want to talk a little bit about different ways that a model can make predictions about the
world, different categories of predictions.
So on the one hand we can talk about discrete or categorical or Goal or binary or boolean.
These are all comparable terms, mostly discrete and categorical.
You use if there's multiple options.
Binary and Boolean is just for when there are two options.
On the other hand, we have numeric predictions or continuous predictions.
So this would be like an exam score instead of pass or fail.
And in fact that is the first example that I'm going to show.
So the discrete or categorical or binary model output would be pass versus fail.
So these are just categories.
And we can also get a model to output numeric or continuous outputs where we are trying to predict the
actual grade of the exam itself.
And you know here's a couple of other examples you can think of.
Text sentiment.
So try to get a deep learning model to to predict whether a piece of text, let's say a tweet or a review
on, on Yelp, you know, a review of a restaurant is generally positive or generally negative.
This is a categorical decision versus something like language translation which is a continuous output.
And here's another example.
We can have something like race which is categorical versus attractiveness, which is you know, we
can we can say on a scale from 1 to 10.
So in the previous several slides, I showed you how to represent the model's performance on a categorical
task, in particular binary task where we have a separating hyperplane.
What if we want to get the model to make continuous predictions?
What does that look like geometrically?
Well it's a little bit more complicated because now the exam score is its own third dimension here sticking
out of this plane.
So imagine this is like a three dimensional plane.
Now it's no longer two dimensions.
We we still have the two dimensions for the time studied and the time slept.
So this is the the input feature space.
That's the same.
But now we need another axis.
We need another dimension to represent the exam score.
And that's because this is a continuous exam score.
This goes from 0 to 100%.
So now the idea is that we have the true result here.
This is what the person actually scored.
So they you know they slept this many hours and they studied this many hours.
And their exam score looks like it's halfway up.
So I don't know, maybe they got a 50% on the exam.
Maybe it was a really, really difficult exam and 50% is actually relatively good.
Now what is the model predict?
The model isn't going to make a prediction that is binary or boolean like true or false.
Instead this model we want to select these um the activation function here the nonlinear function so
that the model is making a prediction that is continuous that we can map onto this numerical exam score.
So then the model prediction is going to look something like this.
The model might predict that this is the exam score from a particular student.
So it's a slightly different way of setting up the problem.
We're going to need to understand for each problem that we want to solve, whether we are making continuous
predictions or discrete or categorical predictions, because the math of deep learning is actually going
to change slightly depending on the kind of output that we need the model to produce.
I hope you now feel that you have an intuitive understanding of the basic architecture of Anns and the
perceptron model.
Starting with the next video, we're going to get into the math underlying Anns, which is really the
math that underlies pretty much all of deep learning.